Sliammon

Ta saɬtxʷ hɛga ta opənayɛ č̓inč̓inəm - The Girl with the 10 pups
EH č̓ič̓noǰɛ, hiya kʷɛn? č̓ičnoǰɛ?
NH šaʔɬtxʷ, hoysʔot θɛθa, hɛga ta č̓inč̓nəm.
EH Oh
NH p̓ip̓ayɛ, hɛɬ šin tuwɛs ta səsaɬtxʷ, nəs kʷa qʷayɩgan ta č̓ɛnoǰɛ saɬtxʷ.
ʔopənusayɛ kʷa ta cičuys hɛga šɛ paʔa saʔɬtxʷ hoyi č̓inč̓inəm,
tuwɛ ta muktəsoɬ, šɛ q̓ʷawɛɬ. Tuwɛ ta q̓ʷawɛɬ nɛ ta p̓ayɩn.
tatutamoɬ šɛ čičyɛs xʷaʔəs muktəs.
Θo hɛwt hoyi tawtəs ta čičyɛs “hɛhaw ʔiymot ta kʷʊnuxʷəs,
t̓ᶿat̓ᶿaʔəm ga θɛθa.
Tatutamoɬ šɛ čičyɛs xʷaʔəs muktəs, tawtəs ta saʔɬtxʷ
"p̓ɛʔɛgančxʷum kʷ č̓inč̓inəm”
Hoysʔot q̓asɛms ta saʔɬtxʷ, qaqasmɛtəs šɛ čičyɛs,
“χʷačɛməs p̓ɛʔɛganč kʷ č̓inəm"
χala kʷuθ čiyɛʔənmɛt tin?
EH ʔəʔ hosčxʷ ga.
NH Θo θɛθa kʷum ta θičəm, t̓ᶿukʷa,t̓oxʷnʊxʷəčxʷ tamas t̓ᶿukʷa?
EH xʷaʔ
NH Hɛɬ ʔɛɬtans ʔəms hɛhaw, t̓əč mumktoɬ.
CH qax šɛ nɛ ta q̓ʷatəm.
NH t̓ᶿukʷa ta nans.
CH ƛəqƛaq̓t ta sayǰɛs.
NH čax təm xaxyɛ, nam kʷ ƛasɛm ta ʔoɬtɛgɩns, q̓ɛq̓ɛ, məsq̓ʷɛm, t̓ᶿukʷa
Hɛɬ šɩn p̓əp̓ƛamos ta saʔɬtxʷ hoyi kʷʊnuxʷəs ta q̓ʷawɛɬ, muktəs.
ɬɛɬxančɛmɛtam šɛ čičyɛs, hoyi tawtəs “p̓ɛʔɛgančxʷum kʷ č̓inč̓inəm.
χwaʔot čiyaʔənəməs, θo xəpi t̓ᶿɛt̓ᶿɛyim kʷ tᶿukʷa.
p̓ɛʔɛgɩn, tawtəs ta čičyɛs "xaxyɛtᶿ kʷowa, haq̓haq̓əm kʷ taməs”
Hɛyoʔot t̓oxʷnam ta č̓inč̓inəms.
Nɛʔ ƛəmɛs ta qayɛmɛxʷ ta ƛamstənɛt, nam ta namuʔɛt tɛʔɛ.
ta p̓oho,, p̓ah, ta k̓ik̓ik̓, ta p̓al, ʔukʷ nɛ ƛəmɛs, qayɛmɛxʷoɬ hɛwtam.
ʔukʷ tam ɬuɬuk̓ʷ, nɛʔoɬ ƛəmɛs, ʔukʷ xʷɛxʷɛt ta ʔiʔayɛ, huktoɬ matz.
Hoysʔot saʔa xəp̓ay, toxʷnʊxʷəcxʷ kʷa nans ta xʷəwʔamɛn?
CH χʷaʔ
NH šɛmɛt p̓ayɩn tuwɛ ta sukʷɛm, tuwɛ ta t̓əxamay.

Klahoose

p̓al hɛga ta šɛt hɛgus - Heron and the transformer
čiyatəm ta qaymɩxʷ qoʔqols ta šɛt hɛgus.
čiyʔnom p̓al qoʔqols ta šɛt hɛgus,qaytʔčɛnsəmholə ʔoɬ.hat θapaθot p̓al teqɛʔtəs šɛ ƛaqʔ ƛaqt χapay,hoʔmɛtəm šɛ tumɩš. qayɛtəs p̓al kʷunəs təm hayʔhaytəs?hɛsəm teʔe χapay təəθ qayt šɛ šɛt hɛgus ga qolʔas. χʷa gayʔnaχʷəs p̓al kʷɛʔkʷaysχʷəs ta šɛt hɛgus. hɛhawsəm ʔiy teʔe χapay ʔəθ maqsen. χopoʔtəs šɛ χapay ʔaʔta moʔosʔos p̓al. maʔtəs šɛ sɛʔsaʔa χapay ʔiyʔ χopotəs a gi:awsʔos p̓al. hɛɬ ʔiytʔ nəms p̓al st̓ᶿokʷ ƛaqt ta maqsən ʔiy ƛaqʔ ƛaqt ǰisʔǰisɩns.hɛsəm təθ nəm,payɛtčχʷɩm qoqɬəm θɛʔθɛyɩt təθ ʔɛɬtən.



Sechelt

S-tutula ?e te Schenam - The Dog Family
Xwa ?e she ?an-nut ?e te hiwus te slhanay minas kwes yaltas te s-tl’ems.
Tu?it te nanat kwes tsus-us lhe lhek’ slhanay.
Nay-stum ?e lhe smanalh lhe slhanay ?iy te schenu kwes kwen-ay-tems.
T’i la kw’elh nanat kems t’i tsu ?itut lhe slhanay tl’lhems*** kwetl’s ?ultutxw te stumish.
Pala ?et kwe-kwetl’ te stumish ti lhem waletsl lhe slhanay lhewat la huy stumish.
T’i natam ?e lhe slhanay kwachauxw te temlh ?e chalash-s kem kuy ye wat chxw ?e te ?elaychins.
T’i la kwetl’ ?e te nanat kem e’I kwatas te temlh ?e te ?elaychins.
T’i la kwetl’ te pala skeltkem kwenatem te slhanay ?e lhe smanalh te ?ukw’ stemtumish.
Kwaxt t’i suxetasit te temlh ?e te stutumish kem t’I suxetasit.
T’i la pala skelt’ kem t’i texw-nixw-as kwes pep?iwan.
T’i t’ayakmitem ?e te hiwus lhe slhanay t’i may te statsuts.
T’i kwalhatas lhe smanalh ?e te s-tl’ems tsu chxw kwenat t’e sna s?elhten.
T’i la ?i?ina te ts’ilachis sch’ich’anu lha lhew xalhnexwste sch’ich’anu.
T’i la kwetl’ ?e te pala skelt’ kem t’i tsu ?ulkwu lhe smanalh tl’ilhems suxwtas.
T’i lhewistsam te sch’ich’anu t’I lhems kw’eyilshit ?e te chechem.
Xwa texnixwasit kwes t’i kwenitem ?e lhe tanit. T’i lhems kwenatem ?e lhe tanit te kapus kem t’i namashas ?e te chechem.
T’i lhem kweshwan ten ?ukw mem?iman ?iy lhe tanit.


Sḵwx̱wú7mesh / Squamish


HUL'Q'UMI'NUM' / Halkomelem

Qun’ tthu Qwuni ’u tthu Sum’shathut - Seagull steals the sun
Sxwuy’em’ tun’a. Sqwil’qwul ts’u ’u kw’un’a ’nan ’uw’wulh hith. Stutesulh tthu Sum’shathut, ’uwu tsakwus tthu shni’s. Suw’ne’nuts’uw’t·hwum’s ’u tthu siye’yus. Tsusutum’ ts’u thuw’ne’ullh mustimuhw ’u tthu Xeel’s, “Kw’oukw’uy’ukw tseep, yath tseep ’uw’kw’oukw’uy’ukw ’un’suw’qutl’um’shulup tthu ts’ul’ts’s tthu stseelhtun. Nilh tse’ ’un’lumxutun, le’lum’utum’ tsu’ tthu ’un’lelum’.”

Suw’kw’oukw’uy’ukws ts’u tthuw’ne’ullh, suw’hun’umuts suw’mi’s me’shum tthu ts’ul’ts’s tthu stseelhtun. Suw’yuhwun’wushum’s ’u tthu ni’ yushhwun’wushs, st’e ’uw’niis skw’a’wus. Mukw’ ts’u tthu hulelum’ ni’ ni’stuhw tthey’ skw’a’wuss ni’ ’u tthu shelh. Ni’ sul’lits’ ’u tthey’ ts’ul’ts’s tthey’ stseelhtun.

Suw’tl’e’ushutum’s tthu Sum’shathut ’uw’miis tl’pil. ’uwu kws nem’s ’uw’yunu’as ’u tthu shelh ’u kws nem’s luw’ilum. Ni’ ts’u tl’e’ xul’ts’thut sus nem’ ’uw’yuhuy’uthut. Nilh kwu’elh kws hwuw’es nem’us luw’ilem ’i’ ni’ wulh punusthut ’u tthey’ ts’ul’ts’s tthu stseelhtun. Ni’ hwust’ul’i’t’iyam’ tthey’, st’e ’uw’niis hwus’itth’ums.


Hǝn̓q̓ǝmin̓ǝm

(brief account of family history)
Xʷənaʔ syewənałct. Wilapiya θə nə sk̓ʷix, ʔi təli cən ʔəƛ̓ Scəwaθən. Ni kʷθə nə sc̓aməqʷ siʔem Stetson təliʔ ʔəƛ̓ Scəwaθən. ʔi cən nə sƛ̓i k̓ʷə cəsetaləm sx̌ʷəx̌ʷəyem ʔə k̓ʷə xə́naʔ syewənałct. Wəłqeʔis ʔə c̓twaʔ tə sqʷi:l̓qʷəl̓s kʷθə nə sc̓aməqʷ siʔem Stetson ni scłiqən kʷθə sme:nt ʔəƛ̓ Cheam ʔə kʷθə yewən sweyq̓əʔ. Ni sewq̓ənəpəs. Ni kʷecnəxʷ ʔə tə ƛ̓ces ʔi ni həyeʔ ƛ̓atiʔi ƛ̓ces ʔə tə Scəwaθən ni k̓ʷə ʔənəcə scłiqən ʔə kʷθə yewən sweyq̓əʔ ni c̓ə k̓ʷə ʔi kʷikʷəxtəm k̓ʷə Sƛ̓eləp. I nem sƛ̓piqən ʔi ni θəyt tə leləms ni sweʔs qəx məsteyəxʷ ʔə kʷθə leləm, ni k̓ʷə ʔənəcə həli kʷθə nə sc̓am̓əqʷ siʔem Stetson. Nanəł ʔəw̓ ʔiyəs ʔe kʷθə sx̌ʷiʔem̓s t̓ᶿə sʔəl̓eləxʷəł nił t̓ᶿə ʔəw̓ ʔiyəs ʔal̓ q̓pəθət ʔiʔ ʔiyəs x̌ʷiʔem, x̌ʷiʔem. Səw̓ xʷən̓ ʔəxʷin̓ ʔal̓, ʔəw̓ sƛ̓iƛ̓qəł ʔal̓ ʔiʔ sq̓əq̓aʔ cən ʔə t̓ᶿə nə sil̓ə ʔə kʷs q̓pəθəts t̓ᶿə sʔəl̓eləxʷ ʔiʔ wəł x̌ʷiʔem nec̓aʔ niʔ c̓ełəm̓əte:n̓ niʔ cən təw̓ heʔk̓ʷ. Hay čxʷ q̓a.


Halq'eméylem

SPÁTH QES TE SLÍLK’YAP - Bear and (little) Coyote
Letsáxw kwes ye ímex te Spáth lhe’á te xálh. Yemí les em tútl’o te Slílk’yap. Slílk’yap ew ímexosem ite ew tl’o ó xálh. Kwa kwes xwechómes yutl’ólem su tl’eléxw. Tl’ó te Spáth e’qwál yewál, tl’ósu thé:t, “La, éltha Spáth qésu tl’o el swá te xálh.” Éwe lísi q’ál te Slílk’yap, thé:t tútl’o, “Tsel Slílk’yap, te éltha tl’o el swa te xálh.” Lu tu híth kwes xét’é te’í qésu eyóthet q’eyq’xótel yutl’ólem. Thé:t te Spáth, “Éltha Spáth, qésu tl’o el swa te xálh.” Thé:t te Slílk’yap, “Éltha Slílk’yap qésu tl’o el swa te xálh.” Lí te stl’epíqel te Sts’ép’eq xwelelá:metes te Spáth qes te Slílk’yap. Tl’o su xwe ste’áwel te Sts’ép’eq kwes las kwí láte xálh kwes tél:exwes lís xwe:ít. Thé:t te Sts’ép’eq, “Chap xwe:ít ó?” Thé:t te Spáth, “Éltha Spáth, tl’o el swa te xálh.” Thé:t te Slílk’yap, “Tl’o el swa te xálh.” Tl’o su tu qwelqwelíwel te Sts’ép’eq kw’e tselíl. Qésu léte selóthels te xálh xwe’áyam yethá. Tl’eléxw tútl’o. Tl’o su xélts’thet tútl’o su kw‘ístexwes te stl’ép’elets qésu le xwe’áyam qelát. Kwéts’lexwes te stl’ép’elets te Sts’ép’eq te Spáth xélts’thét, tl’ósu hélem xwemxálèm lhe’á te xálh. Kwéts’lexwes te stl’ép’elets te Sts’ép’eq te Slílk’yap tl’ó su hélem xwemxálèm. El xwítsel te xálh te Sts’ép’eq qésu thé:t, “ÉLTHA STS’ÉP’EQ QÉSU EL SWA TE XÁLH.” 

I AM SKUNK AND THIS IS MY ROAD


Nooksack

(place names)
T’elt’álaw7 Tl’eqx Lhelhókw’ey Ts’íkwemish Méqsen Sqwehálich Lhchálos Shóqwil Kwánech Temíxwten Semáts Xácho7 Nuxwsá7aq Spálhxen Yexsáy Leme7ólh Nuxw7íyem Nuxwt’íqw’em Chuw7álich Xwkw’ól7oxwey Kwelshán Kweq’ Smánit Shéqsan Ch’ésqen Ts’éq Núxwaymaltxw Yúmechiy Kwetl’kwítl’ Smánit Xachu7ámish Ch’ínukw’ Xalachiséy Chúkwenet Xwótqwem Nuxwkw’ól7exwem Tl’aqatínus Nuxws7áxwom Shkw’em


Straights Salish (Saanich)

Exerpt from "Raven Abandons his Son"
MEQȻEĆIL I U QUWÍC̸ TŦE SPOL. ṈEN TŦE ṈENṈENEs TŦUNIȽ SPOL. QÁQI. QÁQI OL UWENE STÁṈ S,IȽENs. NEȾE SC̸ÁĆEL I EX̱ITES E TŦE SNEW̱EȽ TŦE MÁNs. EX̱ITES TŦE SNEW̱EL TŦE MÁNs IȻȽ ŦILEĆ E TŦE SKOLEȽ. SU TOLNEW̱Ȼ SU I,ȽENs TŦE MÁNs EȻSI,E SHÁWE. SU TOLNEW̱Ȼ SU I,ȽENs TŦE MÁNs EȻSI,E SQUWÍC̸.

OȽ E TŦE SNEW̱EȽ TŦE MÁNs SUȻȺLs E TŦEȻEĆIL. TUWE X̱ENÁṈ IȻȽ TES TŦUNIȽ TŦE SWIULES E TŦE SNEW̱EȽ TŦE MÁNs. SU OȽs. TES TŦE SPOL E TŦE SNEW̱EȽ SU OȽs. UWENE SXĆITsȻ SȻȽ EL,OLEȽ TŦE SWIULES E TŦE SNEW̱EȽ TŦE SC̸EC̸ȺL. UWENE SXEĆTIṈs E TȽ SPOLȻ SȻȽ ELOL,EȽs TŦE SWIULES SC̸ÁC̸EL. SU YÁs QUWÍC̸ TŦUNIȽ SPOL I U I EL,OLEȽ TŦUNIȽ TŦE ṈENEs I SC̸ÁC̸EL. SU YÁ SQUYEC̸ SU LELÁ,NEṈ TŦUNIȽȻ SI ĆḴȺYE,s TŦE MÁNs TŦE SĆÁNEW̱. ȽÁL TŦUNIȽ E TŦE S,ILEḴSEN TŦE SPOL.


Samish


Lushootseed

From "The Legend of the Boy" by Emma Conrad
Tíʔəʔ díʔəʔ ʔáciɫtalbixʷ ʔal tiʔíɫ tuháʔkʷ dᶻíxʷbid čəɫ. Gʷəl tuasɫáɫlil ʔal túdiʔ sq̓xʷábac. Díɫəxʷ tuʔúx̌ʷ. Tuɫáɫlil. Gʷəl ƛ̓uxʷíʔxʷiʔ. Gʷəl diɫ tədəxʷʔúx̌ʷs ə́lgwəʔ. Gwəl tuɫáɫlil ə́lgʷəʔ.

Gʷəl absbədbədáʔ ə́lgʷəʔ. Absbədbədáʔ ə́lgʷəʔ. Gʷəl tiʔíɫ ʔiɫlúƛ̓ bədáʔs ə́lgʷəʔ gʷəl ʔəsq̓ʷúp̓q̓ʷup̓. ʔƏsq̓ʷúp̓q̓ʷup̓. Xʷiʔ gʷəǰə́səds gʷədəxʷuʔíbəšs. Gʷəl day̓ tíʔəʔ čál̓čaləss.

Tuasɫáɫlil tiʔəʔ yəl̓yəlábs ʔal tudíʔ q̓ixʷ sq̓xʷábac ʔal tiʔəʔ pədhə́dəb. Gʷəl lət̓síl. Gʷəl ʔálil tiʔíɫ ƛ̓usq̓íl ʔə tíʔəʔ diʔəʔ sʔuládxʷ, tíʔəʔ díʔəʔ ƛ̓xʷayʔ. Tul̓ʔá gʷəl ləšábalikʷ ə́lgʷəʔ ʔə tiʔíɫ bələsʔuládxʷ ʔi tə biács suxʷíʔxʷiʔs ə́lgʷəʔ.

Gʷəl ʔáliləxʷ ti səč̓ítils dxʷʔal kʷi sət̓síls. Gʷəl ɫuʔəƛ̓áxʷ ə́lgʷəʔ. Ɫubəbəlkʷáxʷ ə́lgʷəʔ dxʷʔal tíʔəʔ díʔəʔ č̓it ɫq̓úcid ʔə tiʔəʔ diʔəʔ sʔílucid ʔə Dxʷqəlb. ʔA kʷədíʔ təsəsɫáɫlils ə́gʷəʔ. Tul̓ʔá gʷəl, gʷəl ʔəƛ̓txʷáxʷ ə́lgʷəʔ tíʔəʔ stabs ə́lgwəʔ ʔal tíʔəʔ dádatu. Gʷəl ʔuʔábgʷasəxʷ ə́lgʷəʔ ʔa tíʔəʔ q̓xʷábac ʔal tiʔəʔ stkʷáb.

Tul̓ʔá gʷəl cúttəbəxʷ ʔə tsíʔəʔ díʔəʔ sɫádəyʔ tíʔəʔ bədáʔs ʔəsq̓ʷúp̓q̓ʷup̓. ʔUcúucəxʷ. "Dəxʷʔúluɫs sixʷ tiʔəʔ dbədáʔ. Gʷəl x̌ʷul̓ cədíɫ kʷi səsx̌ʷáq̓ʷ." Gʷəl xʷiʔ gʷəsəsháydxʷs gʷəx̌ə́ɫəɫəs x̌əč tiʔəʔ bədáʔs. X̌ʷul̓əxʷ ə́lgʷəʔ ʔuʔə́ƛ̓. ʔUqʷíctxʷ ə́lgʷəʔ tə stabs ə́lgʷəʔ sʔábgʷass ə́lgwəʔ.

Tul̓ʔá gʷəl húyucutəxʷ tíʔəʔ diʔəʔ cədíɫ bədáʔs ə́lgʷəʔ ʔəsq̓ʷúp̓q̓ʷup̓. Kʷədádəxʷ tíʔəʔ dəč̓úʔ sʔíc̓əbs ʔi tíʔəʔ sq̓áʔšəds. Tul̓ʔá gʷəl tudᶻəqíl. Diɫ day̓ suhúys ti sudᶻəqíls. Gʷəl dᶻəqíləxʷ dxʷʔal tíʔəʔ t̓aq̓tábac, ti st̓aq̓tábac stútələkʷ. Gʷəl t̓íčib dxʷt̓aq̓túcid. T̓íčibəxʷ. Gʷəl ləsx̌ə́ƛ̓əd tíʔəʔ sʔíc̓əbs. Gʷəl ɫálil dxʷt̓aq̓túcid gʷəl dᶻəqíl dxʷt̓aq̓t. Dᶻəqíl dxʷt̓aq̓t gʷəl ɫčil dxʷʔal tíʔəʔ ʔəsgʷígʷəq̓. Gʷəl tíx̌id tíʔəʔ sʔíc̓əbs ʔuɫə́qʷ. Gʷəl ʔácəc ʔal tiʔíɫ. Gʷəl ɫáx̌il. Gʷəl q̓əlb.

Q̓iləxʷ tíʔəʔ yəl̓yəlábs. Tuasʔábgʷas. Gʷəl xʷiʔálusbitəbəxʷ gʷəl gʷəč̓təbáxʷ. K̓ʷədtəbáxʷ dxʷčad kʷi sʔux̌ʷs, dxʷčad kʷi sʔux̌ʷs. ʔUk̓ʷədtəbáxʷ gʷuk̓ʷít̓əs. Gʷəl gʷət̓əbáʔ. Gʷəl gʷəp̓ə́q̓ʷ ʔal ti stúləkʷ. Tul̓ʔá gʷəl ʔácəc. Xʷíʔəxʷ gʷəsúl̓ʔuluɫs ə́lgʷəʔ. X̌ʷul̓əxʷ ə́lgwəʔ ʔugʷə́č̓əb. Gʷəl xʷiʔ gʷədəxʷkʷə́ddxʷs ə́lgwəʔ ʔal tiʔíɫ dəxʷux̌ʷs.



Twana


Quileute


S’Klallam

The Flood
ʔaʔ kʷi st̕áy̕əŋt̕əŋs yaʔ tiə sčaʔyətə́ŋxʷən ƛ̕áy ʔuʔ níɬ ʔaʔ kʷi st̕áy̕əŋt̕əŋs yaʔ kʷi yíy̕ sčtə́ŋxʷən. naʔc̕áʔuŋxʷ sčtə́ŋxʷən. qʷin̕ə́kʷitəŋ ʔaʔ či cícɬ siʔám̕ kʷi čnaʔátəŋ ʔaʔ či snə́wəs. ʔə́y̕ ʔəcɬtáyŋxʷ; ʔə́y̕ xʷanítəm. nəxʷst̕éʔwiʔəɬ. ʔiʔ x̣ən̕átəŋ kʷi nə́wə, "yéʔkʷsəŋ! čáy ʔaʔ či čə́q sčaʔkʷaʔyúɬ.'' x̣ən̕átəŋ kʷi nə́wə, "yéʔkʷsəŋ! t̕áyəŋt̕əŋ caʔ tiə sčaʔitə́ŋxʷən ʔiʔ ʔáwənə caʔ hiyí. ʔuʔhúy či ʔən̕skʷáʔ ʔən̕ʔəcɬtáyŋəxʷ húy caʔ ʔuʔ hiyinúŋət kʷaʔ ʔánəɬs ʔaʔ či nsqʷáqʷi ʔi ʔuʔánəɬ cə ŋə́nŋənaʔ ʔaʔ nə́wə. suʔx̣ən̕átəŋ ʔaʔ nə́wə, "čáy ʔaʔ či čə́q sčaʔkʷaʔyúɬ. čáy ʔaʔ či čə́q sčaʔkʷaʔyúɬ.'' suʔánəɬ ʔaʔ nə́wə. ččáts canu sčaʔkʷaʔyúɬs. čáy kʷi nə́wə ʔaʔ cə sčaʔkʷaʔyúɬs ʔiʔ qʷiŋíts t ʔuʔx̣ə́n̕ xʷanítəm kʷaʔ ʔánəɬs ʔaʔ či sqʷáqʷis ʔaʔ či cícɬ siʔám̕ hiʔ níɬ caʔ suʔhiyinúŋəts či ʔánəɬ "ʔiʔ húʔ cxʷ ʔáwətxʷ ʔánəɬ ʔiʔ kʷán caʔ cxʷ,'' ʔuʔqʷiŋíts cə ʔəcɬtáyŋxʷ xʷiyanítəm. ʔiʔ húy ti suʔsqaʔx̣qíŋ̕s. snaʔniʔtiʔúʔəŋ̕. húy ti suʔsqaʔx̣qíŋ̕s kʷi nə́wə ʔaʔ ti snaʔniʔtiʔúʔəŋ̕ ʔi ʔuʔáwə c stáŋənə nə́wə cə sqaʔx̣qíŋ̕. ʔuʔsə́ɬəŋ ʔuʔ čaʔčáʔts cə sčaʔkʷaʔyúɬs. níɬ suʔhúynəxʷs čáʔčts. níɬ suʔq̕pə́ts suʔx̣ə́ˑˑˑn̕əs stáŋ či čə́saʔ swə́y̕qaʔ ʔiʔ ti sɬániʔ. ʔuʔx̣ən̕ínəkʷ taʔtáʔciŋəxʷ ʔiʔ ʔənʔá ʔiʔ ʔúyɬ ʔaʔ cə sčaʔkʷaʔyúɬ. nəxʷtqə́təŋ. nəxʷtqə́ts cə súɬ, cə sčaʔkʷaʔyúɬs ʔaʔ kʷi skʷɬʔúyɬs či ʔuʔx̣ən̕ínkʷ taʔtáʔciŋəxʷ ʔiʔ či ŋə́nŋənəʔs ʔiʔ či ɬənɬániʔs ʔiʔ či ʔəŋʔíŋcs. ʔúyɬ ʔaʔ cə sčaʔkʷaʔyúɬ. ʔiʔ níɬ suʔŋaʔk̕ʷaʔcúts ʔuʔ ʔiʔáʔiɬ. ʔáwənə nəsx̣čít kʷaʔ k̕ʷínəs skʷáči či ŋaʔk̕ʷaʔcúts. ʔiʔ ŋaʔk̕ʷaʔcút cə ŋə́nŋənaʔs. ʔiʔáʔiɬ ʔaʔ cə sčaʔkʷaʔyúɬ. níɬ suʔɬə́məxʷs. ʔənʔáˑˑˑ ɬə́məxʷ. c̕úʔkʷs skʷáči c sɬə́m̕xʷs. níɬ suʔtə́ss kʷi c̕úʔkʷs skʷáči. níɬ suʔənʔás cə qʷúʔ. ʔənʔá t̕áyəŋ̕t̕əŋ̕ tə sčtə́ŋxʷən. ʔiʔ níɬ suʔənʔás c̕əyəc̕íŋi. ʔənʔá cə sqaʔx̣qíŋ̕ yaʔ cə snaʔniʔtiʔúʔəŋ̕̕. ʔənʔá kʷaʔkʷə́čəŋ "ʔúyɬtuŋɬ! ʔúyɬtuŋɬ!... ʔúyɬtuŋɬ!'' ʔiʔ ʔáwə kʷaʔ. ʔáwə c ʔánəɬ kʷi nə́wə. ʔənʔáˑˑ kʷaʔčaʔɬ cə qʷúʔ. níɬ suʔənʔás ʔiʔp̕ákʷəŋ cə sčaʔkʷaʔyúɬs. p̕ákʷəŋ ʔiʔ kʷi st̕áy̕əŋt̕əŋs cə sčaʔyətə́ŋxʷən ʔuʔ-... cə ʔáwə c q̕ʷáq̕ʷiʔ, sx̣əyáʔəs xʷiyanítəm q̕ʷúy kʷaʔ. x̣ʷáˑˑy cə ʔuʔx̣ə́n̕ stáŋ ʔiʔ či taʔtáʔciŋəxʷ ʔiʔ či ʔuʔnuʔx̣ən̕ínəkʷ ʔaʔ tə sčtə́ŋxʷən. x̣ʷáy kʷə ʔuʔx̣ə́n̕ yaʔ xʷiyanítəm. níˑˑɬ ʔuʔ p̕ákʷəŋ cə sčaʔkʷaʔyúɬ. ʔənʔáˑˑ kʷə kʷi qʷúʔ. ʔiʔ tə́s c sx̣aʔikʷuʔyéʔč sŋiyánt. c̕ɬp̕iyéʔqʷ. c̕ɬp̕iyéʔqʷ ʔuʔ ɬə́ŋ. ʔuʔáwənə ʔəx̣ín ʔaʔ kʷi sxʷʔiyá ʔaʔ nə́wə či sčtə́ŋxʷən ʔəsʔéʔnəŋ̕. ʔiʔ níˑˑɬ suʔx̣ʷə́y̕q̕ʷs kʷsə sčaʔkʷaʔyúɬs ʔiʔáʔiɬ kʷi nə́wə. ŋə́n̕ skʷáči či sx̣ʷə́y̕q̕ʷs. ŋəsɬšáʔ. ŋəsɬšáʔ cə sx̣ʷə́y̕q̕ʷs ʔiʔ čaʔƛ̕áy həwíyŋ cə qʷúʔ. t̕áqʷi. t̕áqʷi. níɬ suʔ-...  níɬ suʔhiyáˑˑʔs kʷi qʷúʔ t̕áqʷi ƛ̕áy. st̕ə́ŋ cə sčaʔkʷaʔyúɬ ʔaʔ tə sčtə́ŋxʷən. x̣ʷáˑˑy kʷi sq̕ʷayáʔšəns cə ʔaʔyəcɬtáyŋxʷs. kʷiə ʔaʔyəcɬtáyŋxʷ nəxʷsƛ̕áy̕əm̕. ʔuʔx̣ən̕ínkʷ ʔəcɬtáyŋxʷ. níɬ suʔnáʔc̕uʔ. náʔc̕uʔ kʷɬčə́q. čx̣čŋín ʔiʔ níɬ suʔqʷáyŋts c ʔəcɬtáyŋxʷ, "yéʔkʷsəŋ! yéʔkʷsəŋ! q̕pə́t či sʔíɬən. yəc̕ə́t či n̕sxʷqʷəyaʔčáy ʔaʔ či qʷúʔ!'' níɬ suʔ-...  kʷi kʷɬčə́q ʔiʔ... x̣ən̕áts tə ʔəcɬtáyŋxʷ kʷaʔ yéʔkʷsəŋs. "q̕pə́t či n̕sʔíɬən či n̕qʷúʔ. ʔiʔ ʔúyɬ ʔaʔ či ʔən̕sčaʔkʷaʔyúɬ. ʔiʔ ʔúyɬ či ʔən̕skʷáʔ ʔən̕ŋə́nŋənaʔ ʔiʔ či n̕ʔəŋʔíŋc. ʔúyɬ ʔaʔ či n̕sčaʔkʷaʔyúɬ.'' níɬ kʷaʔ k̕ʷíns yaʔ čtə skʷáči ʔiʔ ʔənʔá cə qʷúʔ. ʔənʔáˑˑ ʔiʔ cə sqaʔx̣qíŋ̕ ʔaʔ cə kʷɬčə́q ʔaʔ kʷi sk̕ʷə́snəqs qʷiŋíts či ʔəcɬtáyŋxʷ kʷaʔ yéʔkʷsəŋs, ʔúyɬ ʔaʔ cə sčaʔkʷaʔyúɬs ʔiʔ ʔáwənə sʔíɬəns. ʔáwənə qʷúʔs. ʔáwə c ʔánəɬ ʔaʔ kʷi saʔátəŋs ʔaʔ cə kʷɬčə́q kʷaʔ yéʔkʷsəŋs. ʔənʔáˑˑˑ kʷaʔčaʔɬ cə qʷúʔ! ʔuʔx̣áˑˑn̕ cə ʔəcɬtáyŋxʷ ʔuʔ ʔúyɬ ʔaʔ či sčaʔkʷaʔyúɬs ʔuʔútx̣s. níɬ suʔhiyáˑˑʔs. tə́s ʔaʔ cə sx̣aʔikʷuʔyéʔč ʔiʔ t̕ə́ŋ̕. cə́xʷ kʷɬaʔ kʷi cə sx̣aʔikʷuʔyéʔč sŋiyánt. t̕áyəŋt̕əŋ. níɬ suʔčə́saʔ cə ʔiyáˑˑ ʔaʔ tə sq̕tayéʔqʷs cə sŋiyánt. čə́saʔ. x̣ʷənáŋ ʔaʔ kʷɬə. níɬ suʔtə́ss ʔiʔ t̕áyəŋt̕əŋ cə sŋiyánt ʔiʔ šə́wi cə čə́saʔ! ʔənʔá šə́wi! ʔiʔ níɬ suʔhiyáʔs cə qʷúʔ ʔiʔ níɬ suʔšə́wis kʷə sčə́saʔs. sq̕tayéʔqʷs cə sŋiyánt. ʔiʔ níɬ suʔtə́ss ʔaʔ tə sx̣aʔikʷuʔyéʔč ʔiʔ čáy cə ʔaʔyəcɬtáyŋxʷ ʔaʔ cə x̣ʷéʔləms. ʔi ʔuʔq̕tawyéˑˑʔ canu čə́saʔ. níɬ suʔt̕áyəŋt̕əŋ cə sxʷʔiyás cə sčáʔis x̣ʷéʔləm. ʔiʔ ɬaʔníct cə x̣ʷaʔx̣ʷáʔiɬ x̣ʷéʔləm. ʔiʔ níɬ suʔʔiyáˑˑs. ʔiʔ c̕ɬə́p̕i kʷaʔ cə čə́saʔ. níɬ suʔʔiyás ɬaʔnícts canu ʔaʔyəcɬtáyŋxʷ. ʔiyáˑˑ kʷaʔčaʔɬ ʔiʔáʔiɬ ʔaʔ cə sčaʔkʷaʔyúɬ ʔuʔútx̣s ʔiʔ ŋaʔk̕ʷaʔcút ʔaʔ cə ƛ̕áyuc̕i cə st̕áy̕əŋt̕əŋs. ʔiʔ níɬ suʔt̕áqʷis. t̕áqʷi cə qʷúʔ. həwíyŋ. níɬ suʔƛ̕áys ʔínəŋ cə sŋiyánt sx̣aʔikʷuʔyéʔč. níɬ suʔyəx̣ʷás cə x̣ʷéʔləms suʔsɬéʔɬən̕s yaʔ cə sčaʔkʷaʔyúɬs ʔiʔ ʔənʔá həwíyŋ ʔiʔ néʔts ʔiʔ kʷinu čx̣čŋín kʷɬčə́q ʔiʔ cə ʔánəɬs. ʔənʔáˑˑ ʔiʔwáʔwaʔ ʔaʔ cə qʷúʔ ʔaʔ kʷi st̕áʔqʷis. néʔ kʷi ʔáwə c...  kʷi ʔáwə c ʔánəɬ ʔaʔ kʷi sx̣ən̕átəŋs ʔaʔ cə kʷɬčə́q kʷaʔ q̕pə́ts či sʔíɬəns ʔiʔ či qʷúʔs kʷi sŋaʔk̕ʷaʔcúts ʔaʔ ʔəsɬéʔɬən̕ ʔaʔ canu tə skʷáʔs ŋə́nŋənaʔs ʔiʔ ti ʔəŋʔíŋcs. ʔuʔáwənaʔ sʔéʔɬəns. ʔáwə c ʔánəɬ ʔaʔ kʷi ssaʔátəŋs ʔaʔ q̕pə́t či sʔíɬəns ʔiʔ či qʷúʔ. čɬqə́nəxʷ. šáʔš. níɬ suʔ-... níɬ suʔʔa... čɬqə́nxʷs ʔiʔ níɬ suʔʔaʔčšítis ʔaʔ cə q̕áyaʔŋis ŋə́nŋənaʔs. ʔaʔčšíti ʔaʔ či sʔíɬən. níɬ suʔənʔáˑˑs ʔiʔt̕áʔqʷi cə qʷúʔ. ʔənʔá kʷaʔčaʔɬ səwáʔ cə ʔəcɬtáyŋxʷ ʔiʔáʔiɬ ʔaʔ tə snə́xʷɬs. níɬ suʔənʔáˑˑs ʔiʔt̕áʔqʷi cə qʷúʔ. ʔənʔá cíq ʔaʔ ti sq̕tayéʔqʷs cə sqiyáyŋxʷ ʔiʔ kʷə́y̕kʷi ʔiʔ x̣ʷáy. níɬ suʔənʔáˑˑs t̕áqʷi ʔiʔ ŋə́n̕ néʔ kʷi ʔəcɬtáyŋxʷ x̣ʷə́yəq̕ʷ ʔiʔ txʷaʔnáč̕ sčtə́ŋxʷən. níɬ kʷaʔčaʔɬ sxʷnéʔs či ʔəcɬtáyŋxʷ kʷə yíy̕ ʔiyá ʔaʔ či naʔc̕áʔuŋxʷ sčtə́ŋxʷən nəxʷsƛ̕ay̕əm̕úcən. níɬ kʷaʔčaʔɬ sxʷnéʔ či ʔəcɬtáyŋxʷ ʔiyá ʔaʔ či naʔc̕áʔuŋxʷ sčtə́ŋxʷən. nəxʷsƛ̕ay̕əm̕úcən ʔəɬ qʷáqʷis. či xʷanítəm ʔaʔ tiə ʔáynəkʷ, ʔáx̣əŋ ʔaʔ či sʔáwɬ tiə ɬníŋɬ ʔəcɬtáyŋxʷ čaʔáɬaʔ čaʔyíy̕ c ʔənʔá x̣ʷə́yəq̕ʷ. qaʔyáx̣ct či xʷanítəm. qáyəx̣. cút kʷaʔ ʔáwəs c qʷaʔnítəŋ ʔaʔ či sč̕aʔy... č̕aʔyáʔnəqs ʔaʔ tiə sčtə́ŋxʷən.

Quinault


Upper Chehalis


Lower Chehalis


Cowlitz


Haida

Gyihlingaay (Alaska/Massett orthography)
Ḵ’wii xaataay g̱ii g̱aagahl gyin uu waa saaguust tlak kun tl’ ḵiinsii aa uu tl’ kasaasdlaayaan. Waast Jiingaagan. Singaay laas dluu sg̱unaan uu tlagaay ḵinggagaangaan waadluu jiingaas an tl’ wunsits gyinaan uu tlak g̱iduuwaanuu tlakw na’aangs t’alguu tl’ ts’aagaay laa’asaan tl’ gwadans dluu g̱aa tl’ ḵasaa asdlaayaan. Ts’aagee’an an tl’ g̱iihldaayaan. Xaatgaay ii kingaa tlaagans dluu tl’ gudingaay hlkwiid isdlaayaan. Sinuu ḵ’wiitaas xataay x̱aajaa uu tl’ ga kihlaas. Sintlaa tlii tluu tl’ tlaawhlaan sinuu tl’ xajaawhl. 

Xuyaa Ḵaagaangaas (Skidegate orthogography)
Aaniisuu tangaa g̱aging.ang ’wan suuga. ’Ll xidgwangaas, x̱uyaa’aa. Tllgu ḵ’aawgyaa hllng.aaygi ’laa ḵyaang.aas. Ḵawdiuu gwaay g̱ud gwaa nang ḵadlaa ḵ’ayg̱udyaas ’laagu ḵ’aawgaay g̱an ’laa g̱á ’laa xidaas. Á tl’l sg̱aana ḵidaads ’yaahlgaagaas g̱iinuus gangaang ’laagu gud gwii x̱iihlt’ahliyaagaas. Ga sg̱aanag̱waa g̱ax̱aas ’laa t’isda ḵ’a sḵ’agilaang.aas, tll gwii x̱an, hahl gwii’ad wah gwii’aa. G̱adagaas gyaanuu’asing g̱aalgaagaang ’wan suuga. Nang kilsdlaas naag̱ag̱a.aw tadll chi’a’aawaagan. Sing ḵ’alg̱ada ’ll ḵaaxuhls gyaan ’ll kindagaang.aas. Sda ’laa xid k’udahldats’aasii gyaan gagu ’laa ḵ’aw’aawaasgu x̱an ’laa ḵ’aawgangas.

Xuyaa Qaagaangaas (Bringhurst Orthography)
Aaniisuu tangaa ghagingang wan suuga. Lla xidgwangaas, xhuyaa’aa. Tlagu qqaawgyaa hlangaaygi llaa qyaangaas. Qawdiuu gwaay ghud gwaa nang qadlaa qqayghudyaas llaagu qqaawgaay ghan llaa gha llaa xidaas. A ttla sghaana qidaads yaahlgaagaas ghiinuus gangaang llaagu gud gwii xhiihlttahliyaagaas. Ga sghaanaghwaa ghaxhaas llaa ttisda qqa sqqagilaangaas, tla gwii xhan, hahl gwii’ad wah gwii’aa. Ghadagaas gyaanuu’asing ghaalgaagaang wan suuga. Nang kilsdlaas naaghaagha·aw tadll tsi’a’aawaagan. Sing qqalghada ll qaaxuhls gyaan ll kindagaangaas. Sda laa xid kkudahldattsaasii gyaan gagu laa qqaw’aawaasgu xhan laa qqaawgangas.



Bella Coola

Sniniq’ (Practical Version)
7aytsutts skatmayuutstimutts skayayuutsstuu 7alhtis7alats’iikw’utc. Tm7alats’iilhhaw ctxw tulhlkw’lctxw. 7ays 7alhtxw tatl’mstatx. 7at’mnalstakwkw’u t’axw tutl’mstatx 7alaacwa. 7axw alhnapits swikas 7alaacwa 7uulxlh. 7at’mnalstaw. Tl’apaw sq’amutaw tis7at’mnalstaw. Tl’apskwts’. Tl’apskwts’ tanumaw tatsaatstiitx. Kw’ntatsutkwts’ tanumaw tatl’mstatx. Way tsutkw t’ax. 7anaykts skak’cits tiumataycawtsk was7at’mnalstilhats tsutskw tatl’mstatx 7ulhtasaticstx. Yayaliwatimutnuma tsutsutmiskw tasaticstx. Q’awtsap kaxims asuncwats. Ninitskw t’ayc. Ninitstumkw t’ayc sq’awim. 7anaykaw snapamcwit stam skaumataycaw aq’awtim 7alhtxw wa7at’ma.

Sniniq’ (Davis and Saunders' version)
ʔaycutc skatmayūctimutc skayayūcctū ʔaƚtisʔalac̓īk̓ʷutx. tmʔalac̓īƚƚaw xtXʷ tuƚlk̓ʷlxtXʷ. ʔays ʔaƚtXʷ taƛ̓mstatX. ʔat̓mnalstakʷk̓ʷu t̓aXʷ tuƛ̓mstatX ʔalaaxʷa. ʔaXʷ aƚnapic swikas ʔalaaxʷa ʔūlXƚ. ʔat̓mnalstaw. ƛ̓apaw sq̓amutaw tisʔat̓mnalstaw. ƛ̓apskʷc̓. ƛ̓apskʷc̓ tanumaw tacāctītX. k̓ʷntacutkʷc̓ tanumaw taƛ̓mstatX. way cutkʷ t’aX. ʔanaykc skak̓xic tiumatayxawck wasʔat̓mnalstiƚac cutskʷ taƛ̓mstatX ʔuƚtasatixstX. yayaliwatimutnuma cucutmiskʷ tasatixstX. q̓awcap kaXims asunxʷac. ninickʷ t̓ayx. ninictumkʷ t̓ayx sq̓awim. ʔanaykaw snapamxʷit stam skaumatayxaw aq̓awtim ʔaƚtXʷ waʔat̓ma.


Diidiitidq

q̓ʷeetiy ʔiš bucibux̣ʷq - Mink and Bear
haaʔubaatx̣aʔsuw bucibux̣ʷq c̓aʔk̓aq wałeek. yuwaʔƛuw haʔubeey̓ibƛ. siqidaakšiƛ̓eeʔsaʔƛuw, kadaak̓eeʔsuw. kaapiʔsaʔƛkuw. yuwaʔƛuw t̓iqʷsiƛ̓ƛ hidʔawiseeʔs siqačʔeyk̓ƛquy haʔub. yuwaʔƛuwiš weʔčiƛ̓ƛ. yaahaʔƛuwiʔ q̓ʷeetiy. dačooʔłaʔƛ bucibux̣ʷq̓aq weʔičaaqʔa ʔiš siqaaqʔa haʔub. t̓iqʷsiƛ̓ƛuw hidʔawis siqačʔeykquy. siqačiƛ̓ƛ. yuwaʔƛ haaʔukšiƛ̓ƛ q̓ʷeetiy haʔubaʔk̓aq bucibux̣ʷq̓aq. x̣eʕiikiščiƛ̓ƛuw. yuwaʔƛuw tasaqsawuʔbƛ buckʷeeʔaq haʔub. ʔuʔatiʔbƛ buckʷii. yuwaʔƛ ʔuuyuqstuʔbƛ ʔiʔinxʷišč. yuwaʔƛuw yaacšiƛ̓ƛ. kudukšiƛ̓ƛuw bucibux̣ʷq. —tušeek, siʕaƛ̓ƛx̣iš—waaʔƛuw. yuwaʔƛ daačukšiƛ̓ƛ, yaałuwiʔ wik̓eeʔƛ. t̓iqʷsiƛ̓ƛuw. dačooʔłaʔƛ ʔuuyuqʷaƛqʔa ʔiʔinxʷišč haʔub. —haaʔukšiƛ̓ƛx̣iyiš—waaʔƛ—haaʔukšiƛ̓ƛx̣iyiš. yaahaʔƛuwiʔ buʔak̓ƛ buckʷii ƛaʔuu ʔuuyuqʷaƛ. ʔaadax̣x̣uw wik disaak. yuwaʔƛx̣uw—ʔaadax̣x̣aʔƛx̣iyiš haʔuk—waaʔƛuw. weʔekx̣aʔƛ hakuʔx̣. —ʔiihaʔee, wałšʔeyks—waaʔƛ. yaacšiƛ̓ƛuw. šu.


Cisaaath


Nuu-chah-nulth

QUʔIŠINM̓IT ʔUḤʔIŠ C̓IXʷATINM̓IT - Son-of-Raven and Son-of-Eagle
ʔaah Ḥanuukʷaqitweʔin Quʔišinm̓it quuʔasiič ʔuyi.
Ḥanuuk, haw̓iiqƛ saač̓ink ʔunuuƛ wiiy̓a ʔuʔuʔiiḥ ʔuʔuukʷaqḥ.
ʔAaniyasaʔaała haʔukšiƛ mamaačinƛmasʔaƛquu.
T̓apatšiʔaƛweʔin Quʔišinm̓it wahaak̓aƛ mamaačinƛmas C̓ixʷatinm̓it.
ʔuḥ ʔanaqa ʔaayimk haʔum.
ʔucačiʔaƛ.
Hiy, wahaak, ƛ̓um̓aaʔat.
ƛ̓um̓aaʔat yii t̓iqpiƛ. _
ʕiikwinkweʔin (ʕi/) ʕiikwink. _
ʕiikitweʔin Quʔišinm̓it. _
Mamaačinƛmasʔaƛquu. _
"Čuu ʔaniiłʔič, hiłʔiič. _
Haʔukʔaaqƛeʔicuu. _
Wik̓iičim ʔuušcaḥtačiƛ. _
Čaanaaqƛaḥ haʔumn̓aḥšiƛ," waaʔaƛ.
Hiniiʔas C̓ixʷatinm̓it. _
ʔuʔiiyasweʔin ƛ̓aqaʕas. _
Hiiłḥaasḥaƛweʔin ʔaḥʔaa ciiqciiqa. _
N̓an̓ačmaap̓aƛ Quʔišinmm̓it qʷaaʔapʔitq yaa qʷeeʔiitq yaałʔii ʔuqʔištiikʔi C̓ixʷatinm̓itʔi.
Yaałweʔin hinusa suuḥaa. _
Č̓an̓iiʔaƛ Quʔišinmm̓it qʷaqaa.
ʔanaaƛ ʔustʔiłqa ʔanaqḥ n̓aačsa yee hinaasʔi. _
Okeey, matʕaatuweʔin C̓ixʷatinm̓it. _
N̓iik̓ʷiʔaƛ suuḥaa ʔuuʔiƛ.
Heey, hiyiłweʔin mačinƛ ʔiḥaqaq suuḥaa. _
ʔuukʷiiłšiƛ ... ƛ̓apč̓asʔap̓aƛweʔin. _
"ƛ̓apč̓as" waaʔatma (ʔuqʔištiik) qʷeeʔii ʔaḥʔaa you know - you know the barbecued. - - -
"Qač̓as" ʔuḥmaa ʔukłaa ƛ̓iƛ̓iḥswi ʔaanaḥi the one that (t̓aq...)
Qʷaa ƛ̓apč̓asaƛweʔin suuḥeeʔi ʔiḥaqaq. _
Yee, ʔeʔiišmiḥsaƛweʔin Quʔišinm̓it haʔuk. _
Heey, haʔuk. _
Wiʔiisšiƛweʔin ʕiikʔii, ʔiiḥapuƛ haʔum. _
Čuu, heey, wiinapiłʔaƛweʔin.
"Ča, maw̓aʔaaqƛaḥ ʔaḥn̓ii łuucsmaakʔitqak wahaak̓ap," waaʔaƛweʔin (ʔuqʔiš...) yaałḥ hiłḥʔiitq haʔuk. _
"Haah, wik, hiixʷatpanačuuseʔic. _
ʔuuḥsasaaqƛaḥ hiniics," waaʔaƛweʔin Quʔišinm̓it. _
Wiiy̓imtweʔin naʔuumiḥsap łuucsmaak haʔuk. _
C̓aawuumiḥsa.
Yaqʷinƛitiič ƛ̓iḥaqšiƛuk łuucsma. _
Haaw̓iiqƛuksa ʔuusaaḥi qʷaa ʔani C̓imt̓uuqas. _
ʔucḥimtweʔin c̓imt̓uu. _
Ḥamat̓ameʔic c̓imt̓uu - squirrel.
ʔuusaaḥiweʔin c̓imt̓uu wiiy̓a ʔuušstup ʔuʔiis haʔumštup.
ʔaniis (ʔuqʔištiik) sat̓uu. _
ʔaninqḥʔisqa ʔuqḥii, wiiy̓aqa saamin ʔuʔiis, wiiy̓aqa "berries" ʔuʔiis. _
ʔuusaaḥi ʔani wik̓ap̓aanituk čakupuk ʔuḥ naʔuu haʔuk.
Heey, hiniicsʔaƛ yaacšiƛ. _
Wikweeʔin wałšiƛ Quʔišinm̓it. _
Wiinapaƛsa. _
Naaw̓inḥaƛ haw̓iiqstuʔiikquu huʔaasʔaƛqaƛaa haʔuk yaa m̓aam̓tutukʔi.
Haaʕinʔaƛ Quʔišinm̓it. _
"Y̓uuqʷaaʔaƛ̓im čaanaaƛ," waaʔaƛ, "hiy̓atḥqas. _
ʔuušstiiyeʔiʔaała wahaak ʔuuqpanač," waaʔaƛweʔin ḥaʔukʷiƛ haaʕin. _
Qʷisʔaƛ qiiʔaƛʔitq qʷiyii w̓aqʔuu. _
Wahaak̓aƛ y̓uuqʷaa C̓ixʷatinm̓it quʔišin hiy̓atḥʔitq.
Heey, ƛ̓um̓aaʔaweʔin. _
ʔinkʷiiłweʔin Quʔišinm̓it ʔiiway̓apaq ʔink. _
Qʷisw̓it̓asʔaƛ qʷaaʔap qʷis qʷaaʔamitʔitq yaa yaaqʷin̓akuuḥitʔitq n̓aacsa. _
Hiłaasḥw̓it̓asʔaƛ (ʔuqʔiš) hiy̓atḥʔitq hinaasc̓eʔi n̓ačʕaaʔatuw̓it̓as (ʔuqʔiš) n̓aacsa ʔuq qʷisḥitʔitq. _
Qʷaaʔapw̓it̓as y̓uuy̓uqʷeeʔiik qʷaa. _
Nuut̓iʔiiłimtweʔinʔaała.
Hiy, ciiqciiqšiʔaƛweʔin Quʔišinm̓it. _
Ḥaay̓awiiʔaƛweʔinč̓aʕašʔat qʷiyiiʔitq ciiqciiqa. _
Hiiy, n̓ačuʔał paatx̣paatx̣a yaał c̓eʔiy̓eʔeʔi hiłʔiitq.
Hiiy, matʕaaʔatuweʔin. _
N̓iitk̓ʷiƛ̓asʔat. _
Just caqyaʕaaweʔin Quʔišinm̓it! _
Wiiʕatuʔataƛ č̓aʔak yaa wiḥmałp̓iʕaaʔa suuḥaaqatḥʔap̓aƛ.
Yaałḥ n̓iƛačišt qaḥakḥta. _
Kamtiqnisaƛweʔin yaa qałaatik čiisčiisap taayiiʔak.
Qiiweeʔin qaḥak Quʔišinm̓it. _
Qii. _
Wišcaḥšiʔaƛ yaa w̓aqʔuukʷiłʔi wik̓iit huʔiiʔiƛ. _
Heey, yeełweeʔinʔał w̓aqʔuuqač̓a wik... haathaw̓iiqƛ wiktaksap̓at haʔuk.
"Haah ʔanic̓aƛ̓i yayaač̓ap qaḥakʔitqak!" _
Quʔišin-s be really... _
Wiiy̓asimtweʔin ʔumaqkʷačiƛ. _
Čamiḥta ʔuḥ y̓uuy̓uqʷeʔiik qʷaan̓akuuḥšiƛʔitq qʷis.


Ehattesaht Nuchatlaht

mułmumc - Roots of Ehattesaht
ʔiicʔiiqḥaƛ čamiḥta qʷiʔii ʔakqin mułmumc yaqin činax̣intʔatḥ, ʔiiḥatisʔatḥ, nuučaaƛʔatḥ, č̓iiqƛisʔatḥ. čamiḥtay̓ak ʔiicʔiiqḥa ʔaḥaa ʔaqƛin čamiḥta quuʔasačiƛ. wikiičiƛ ʔaqƛin (ʔuuʔuupi)mamałni qʷaaʔaƛqin ƛaḥ. ʔin huḥtik ʔaqƛin , huḥtiksiƛ ʔaqƛinƛa histaḥqin, qʷiicay̓ukqin. qʷaa cuumyin huḥtisiƛ ciciqi ʔakqin. ʔaḥaa ʔaqƛniš qʷaa ʔuušyuuya, mamums ʔaqƛ. ʕac̓ikšiʔat ciqciqasa ʔunwiiƛs ʔaḥaa ʔiiḥ čumqƛ ʔin naa ʔuuqstayis ʔaḥ, huuʔiiƛ w̓itas ciciqi ʔakqin.

hiy̓aḥs č̓apacʔi - In the Canoe
C̓aʔaawac hiłaas ʔiš ʔiicqʷin. Hiiłsit ʔiš t̓upał kʷuukʷuḥw̓isa. Suč̓as hiłaas ʔiš čums. Hiy̓aqƛ ʔiš sušaskʷi ʔiicqʷin. k̓ʷask̓ʷit hiłaas ʔiš quʔušin. Č̓apac hiy̓aḥs ʔiš ʔiicqʷin. ƛ̓aḥiqs hiłaas ʔiš waaʕit. ƛaḥiqs hiłcu ʔiš ʔiicqʷin.


Kwak’wala

Ḵas'ida̱'asa sa̱n's Ga̱lga'lis - The Path of Our Ancestors

Ḵas'ida̱'asa sa̱n's ga̱lga'lis. X̱a ga̱lga'lis, ba̱gwana̱mu'łida dłig̱adu'łas U'mała̱me'. Gayutłi lax̱a 'Ni'na̱lk̕inux̱w lax̱a 'Na̱mgis. Ḵ̕otła̱li U'mała̱me'yas 'walase'tłi pałatł, la a̱x̱'iłx̱is xwak̕wa̱na lax̱ Heg̱a̱m's - ḵ̕a̱lsatłe' lax̱a na̱ge. Ałag̱awe' sa pała a̱'eda̱'aḵi U'mała̱me' lax̱is gayulas, la it'i x̱is bagwas. La hanat'ła x̱a 'na̱m 'nalas la̱'e dux̱w'atła̱la x̱a t̕łi't̕ła̱wa̱l's. La a̱x̱'ex̱sda̱ ḵa's 'na̱xwaga̱'atła̱le' lax̱. La̱'e lasg̱a̱me' x̱a t̕ła̱wa̱l's la la'dza̱nd x̱a na̱ge. La lax̱is i'si ḵ̕odła̱ł a̱wi'nagwis. La ḵ̕oł'atła̱las he'ileda alumas a̱wi'nagwis. La'a̱m 'nink̕ix̱'id ḵa's a̱'eda̱'aḵe ne'nakw. La a̱'eda̱'aḵa ḵa's le a̱x̱'id x̱is 'ma'mikas. La̱'e ne'nakw la'a̱m a̱x̱a̱mtsis 'walas t̕łag̱a̱kwa̱ma'ya', ḵax̱s he'ma̱'e długwe'. La'a̱m a̱x̱'itsa ḵa̱mxwa lax̱is xum's, i'kila x̱is ba̱k̕wine'. Yu'a̱m długwe' t̕sa̱we'x̱. La'a̱m ga̱lba̱nd ḵas'i a̱'eda̱'aḵa lax̱a t̕a̱xsola. La'a̱m laga̱'a lax̱a wa 'na̱xwała lax̱a t̕łasakw. La laga̱'a lax̱ ḵwisa'dzi'yasi da 'ma̱kola. 'Walas ḵa̱lx'idi U'mała̱me' gayalas la̱'e ḵwisgila ḵasa. La'a̱m k̕waga'a̱l's 'na̱xwała lax̱a wa ḵa's xus'ide' yawas'id. La'a̱m'la̱'e xus'id la̱'e dux̱w'atła̱la x̱a ba̱gwana̱m g̱wasuła̱la lax̱a ḵwiḵwa̱sa'dzi. La'a̱mx̱a̱'e dux̱w'atła̱li da ba̱gwana̱max̱ U'mała̱me'. La'a̱m ha'nakwil a̱'eda̱'aḵa ne'nakw lax̱is lilḵwa̱latłe'. Kwa̱nxwa̱lałtłi da ba̱gwana̱m. Li Kwa̱nxwa̱lał niła x̱is lilḵwa̱latłe'yas duḵwa̱la'e x̱a pa̱x̱a̱la 'na̱xwała lax̱a wa. La'a̱m ḵ̕otła̱lax̱s pa̱x̱a̱la'e U'mała̱me' ḵa̱'es 'walas t̕łag̱a̱kwa̱me'. La̱'mi Kwa̱nxwa̱lał a̱x̱k̕ala x̱is biba̱gwana̱m ḵa's lax̱se' x̱is xwak̕wa̱na ḵa six̱w'ide's tłi'lala x̱a pa̱x̱a̱la ḵa le' lax̱is gukwda̱m's. La'a̱m la̱'etłi U'mała̱me' lax̱ gukwas. La'a̱m wa̱tła ḵu' g̱wix'ida̱'as'nukw lax̱ ka̱lxwalax̱ x̱a 'walasi t̕łag̱a̱kwa̱me'. I's a̱x̱'ex̱sda̱ ḵa's lax̱ude' x̱is t̕łag̱a̱kwas i'sa̱'e a̱'umsa. La'a̱m gwigwa̱łt̕sa̱nda̱x̱ ḵa's lax̱ude' sa a̱m'a̱me''ma̱nix̱w. La'a̱m ax̱ila x̱a wa̱'okw ḵa's ba̱k̕wine'. Ha̱łax̱'itsu'wi U'mała̱me'yasa maya'a̱nłi ha̱ba̱s'a̱ne' sa ḵ̕asa. La'a̱m dalax̱ la̱'e ne'nakwa'. La itso lax̱a t̕a̱xsola. La'a̱m ne'nakw. La tłi'lala x̱is ḵ̕ina̱m lilḵwa̱latłe' ḵa's k̕wiłe'. La'a̱m yax̱w'idtsis ha̱ba̱s'a̱ne'. La'a̱m galabe' gig̱a̱me'yi U'mała̱me' yaḵwa sa 'walas yaḵ̕wima lax̱a galu'ła 'nala. Olak̕al ik a̱wi'nak̕wa̱si da t̕a̱xsola ḵ̕asu's U'mała̱me'. Ha̱s'mix̱ax̱ dłu'wis 'na̱m'x̱dłała ḵax̱s he'ma̱'e galabe' ḵ̕ax̱. G̱eła ḵwisgili 'na̱m'x̱dłałes U'mała̱me'. G̱eła a̱x̱a̱lanukwsa t̕a̱xsola ḵa's t̕ła'yup̕e' dłu' bagwa̱nsap̕e' d̕łu'wis dłidła̱dłola lax̱a ḵwiḵwa̱sa'dzi. La'a̱m ḵadzitłanaxwi da lilḵwa̱latłe' 'na̱mx'idamas x̱a ma'ł lilḵwa̱latłe'. La'a̱m a̱x̱a̱lanukw sa t̕a̱xsola ḵa's t̕ła'yup̕e'. Heda t̕ła'yup̕ula̱mi da t̕łaḵwa g̱wa̱ms, dłu' ha̱ba̱s'a̱ne'yasa 'ma̱lx̱tłu, dłu'wa a'a̱nt, dłu'wa ḵ̕a̱mḵ̕a̱mda̱m, he'misdła olak̕al iki da t̕łi'na. Olak̕al łaxwa̱li da t̕łi'na. K̕iyos g̱wix'ida̱'as a̱x̱ilasu' lax̱a ḵwiḵwa̱sa'dzi. Ḵax̱s he'ma̱'e olak̕al łaxwa̱la t̕ła'yup̕asu'wi da t̕łi'na la dłig̱aḏa̱x'idi da t̕a̱xsoles T̕łi'na T̕a̱xsola. Ałag̱awe's gax̱a̱'e da mamał'a lax̱a̱n's a̱wi'nagwis la t̕ła'yuwi da 'naxwa. T̕ła'yuwi da alumasa x̱a̱n's g̱waya'ya̱'elas. La'a̱m ha'naxw'idi da xwak̕wa̱na t̕ła'yusu'sa da ka̱lka̱lxsisa̱la (ka). La'a̱m ha'naxw'idi da gukwdzi t̕ła'yusu'sa da alumas guk̕wa̱s. K̕iyos la a̱x̱a̱lasa t̕a̱xsola, higa'a̱mli da ga̱lga̱'omas a̱x̱a̱lanukwsa t̕a̱xsola. Lax̱a 'na̱m 'nala, k̕i's tłuma la g̱eła', muwi da t̕sat̕sa̱'yasola gayuł lax̱a 'Namg̱is a̱x̱'ex̱sda̱ ḵa's le ḵasa lax̱a t̕a̱xsolesis ga̱lga'lis. Li da ha̱'yał'a lax̱is giga̱g̱a̱me', wa̱tła ḵa's hiłḵ̕u'la̱me' ḵasa lax̱a t̕a̱xsola. Li da giga̱g̱a̱me' 'nink̕iḵa̱lax̱s tłume'tłi łok̕wimastł dłu' tła̱mḵałtsis ga̱lga'lis, la'a̱młx̱a̱'awis ḵ̕oł'ił x̱is a̱wi'nagwis. Li da giga̱g̱a̱me' t̕sosis i'kila, 'nik ḵe' o'mes yet̕łołaxda'x̱wa'. Li da t̕sat̕sa̱'yasola t̕sosu' sa t̕łi'na sa da giga̱g̱a̱me', 'niksu ka̱'s t̕sowe' x̱is dłi'dłidła̱dłola lax̱a ḵwisa'dzi. I's ḵ̕otła̱li da t̕sat̕sa̱'yasole ḵa's 'nak̕a'ł, k̕i's ḵ̕otła̱la x̱is 'wa'wayastła. La̱'mis ni'noḵa'yas 'nix ḵa ḵatsowe's lax̱a ḵwisa'dzi. La̱'e lax̱is galaba̱nda̱'as lax̱a t̕a̱xsola, li da t̕sat̕sa̱'yasola ka̱ła̱la i's olak̕ala ḵ̕otła̱la x̱is lala̱'a lax̱a t̕a̱xsola. Kika'liḵa̱las g̱wixida̱'as'lax̱a. La kika'liḵa̱la, ̱la'a̱m olak̕al ḵ̕otła̱laxda'x̱w ḵa's wige o'a̱m ḵas'ida' La̱'mida t̕sat̕sa̱'yasola 'nink̕iḵa̱las letłi mup̕a̱nxwa'stła̱ ḵasatł lax̱a t̕a̱xsola. La'a̱mx̱a̱'e dala x̱a yawapsa̱m's. La'a̱m ḵ̕iḵ̕a̱yda̱s la̱'e ḵe'nakwa̱la, g̱wag̱wixs'alas la̱'e ixḵ̕a̱sa̱la lax̱is biba̱k̕wine' dłu'wa ik a̱'wi'nagwis. La i's ḵ̕otła̱laxda'x̱wa̱s tłuma̱'e ya̱xaxda'x̱wa la̱'e dux̱w'atła̱la x̱a wa wastala lax̱a t̕łasakw. La̱'mis ḵ̕oł'atła̱la la̱'e ḵ̕a x̱is lala̱'a, la'a̱m ḵ̕a x̱is la̱'ex̱sḏ'as. La̱'mis x̱a̱nyasas la̱'e tłuma ya̱xa, la'a̱m laga̱'a lax̱is lala̱'as. La'a̱m g̱wał x̱is ḵatsu'wine'. La̱'mi da t̕sat̕sa̱'yasola it'id ḵa's le t̕sat̕sa̱mxsila x̱a ał'ugwa̱'la 'na̱mx̱dłała dłu'wis 'ni'na̱mukw la lax̱a t̕a̱xsola ḵa ugwaḵe's la ḵasa lax̱ ḵas'ida̱'asa sa̱n's Ga̱lga'lis. La'a̱m ḵ̕wa̱l'ba'. La̱'mi da t̕sat̕sa̱'yasola it'id ḵa's le t̕sat̕sa̱mxsila x̱a ał'ugwa̱'la 'na̱mx̱dłała dłu'wis 'ni'na̱mukw la lax̱a t̕a̱xsola ḵa ugwaḵe's la ḵasa lax̱ ḵas'ida̱'asa sa̱n's Ga̱lga'lis. La'a̱m ḵ̕wa̱l'ba'.

Lida t̕a̱xsola a̱x̱a̱lasi da 'Na̱mg̱is dłu'wa lilḵwa̱latłe' gayutł lax̱a ḵwiḵwa̱sa'dzi lax̱a lux̱wsa̱mx'idi na̱ḵax̱'a̱nx̱ila. 


Qʷi·qʷi·diččaq (Makah)

Whaling transcript in Makah
qʷiyubuta·ł kabatse·ʔit ʔiʔi·x̌ʷaqa·ł čačabax̌i·kłʔit pi·šbe·daq̓aqƛ ̓k̓a·šč̓uʔu· ʔiš yaša·baq̓aqƛbadax̌ ʔadʔaʔƛ̓ubał kabat̓ap ʔiʔi·x̌ʷaqa·ł ʔuʔu·tax̌su·bač čačabax̌ kabat̓ap qʷa·ʔux̌. 


Shuswap

"Hunting and Fishing with Grandfather" - Seymour Petel
W7ác kwecw mtn7úq̓wy mtsk̓láp ltwtwwíwtes má7a. Yrí7 rstsúns kwecw lxpá7as ltsk̓áwlc: «Cwúy̓ ma7 náskt t·sp̓stwácwmstm ma7 qít̓mkt mk̓wúlmkt tkswáwll, ma7 k̓ácmkt». Yrí7 rsqwetsátss kwecw lxpá7as, kítsc kwecw nxyúm tpásellkwa sp̓stwácwmstm. Kítsc kwecw lxpá7as, yrí7 lxpá7as kwecw rtsk̓áwlc yrí7 rskwáns lsmáncs, yrí7 rsnínk̓ms, yrí7 rscpeq̓wqín̓ms. W7ác ma7 rcpeq̓wqín̓mes, qnímntmes kwecw rsáwllkwa 7ac tpúlltes, táh7 cwum t̓rí7 ksnáwt. Y7ána ma7 nsáwllkwa w7ác rcílsmes; tsúns kwecw lxpá7as: «Násmntya ma7 ts̓xntápes stám̓y yrí7 7ac rpúlltes». Nás kwecw ts̓xntám kwecw lxpá7as w7ác nrí7 rxqwút̓mes. Ts̓xntám wl w7ác nrí7 rskm̓cís, tsúnses 7skwáns rxwú7t̓. Xyúm ma7 y7ána rxwú7t̓, tsháqn kell7úpekstnka t·sq̓wáxt, yrí7 ma7 rskm̓cís tsúns 7skwáns y7ána ma7 lxwú7t̓, tntás rsúpa7s, mt̓qwápqntmes lskm̓cís m7stkíc n7án npásellkwa.  


Lillooet

“Máhyeqs and the Mouse” (Eijk-Mount Currie Orthography)
Niɬ ʔayɬ lcʔa smáma tihúz’a qʷǝl’qʷal’ǝl’tmínan. Náskʷuʔ ʔámlǝx ʔákʷuʔ cípunsa. Níɬƛ’uʔ sƛ’áksas tix̌lákaʔsa. Cixʷ ʔákʷuʔ, níɬƛ’uʔ sǝswáʔ, kʷánas ʔǝtʔú ʔisqáwca. Wáʔkʷuʔƛ’uʔ ʔátiʔ x̌ílǝm, ƛ’ákkʷuʔ knátiʔ tipúʔy’axʷa. Níɬkʷuʔƛ’uʔ skʷánas, lip’in’áskʷuʔ. Níɬkʷuʔƛ’uʔ ʔayɬ scuts: “Wáʔmaɬ ʔayɬ látiʔ kapǝ̣́ta”. Níɬkʷuʔƛ’uʔ ʔayɬ skɬakaʔmínaskʷuʔ latiʔ tisqawcaxʷiɬák’a, naʔq’ sqawc tikʷanǝnsása. Nkaʔask’áhǝm’tuʔ ʔayɬ nipúʔy’axʷa. Níɬtiʔ qʷámqʷmǝt száytǝns smáma. Cúkʷtiʔ. 

“Máhyeqs and the Mouse” (Bouchard Orthography)
Nilh aylh lts7a smáma tihúz̓a qwel̓qwal̓tmínan. Náskwu7 7ámlec ákwu7 tsípunsa. Nílht̓u7 st’áksas tixláka7sa. Tsicw ákwu7, nílht̓u7 seswá7, kwánas et7ú isqáwtsa. Wá7kwu7t̓u7 áti7 xílem, t̓ákkwu7 knáti7 tipú7y̓acwa. Nílhkwu7t̓u7 skwánas, lip̓in̓áskwu7. Nílhkwu7t̓u7 aylh stsuts: “Wá7malh aylh láti7 kapv́ta”. Nílhkwu7t̓u7 aylh sklhaka7mínaskwu7 láti7 tisqawtsacwilhák̓a, nao7q̓ sqawts tikwanensása. Nka7ask̓áhem̓tu7 aylh nipú7y̓acwa. Nílhti7 qwámqwmet száytens smáma. Tsúkwti7.


Thompson River Salish

"The Man who Went to the Moon" (intro. Americanist Orthography)
Wʔéx ekʷu néʔ ƛ̓iʔsqáyxʷ, ƛ̓uʔ ʔe sxʷúy̓s xʷǝsxʷesít u ł xéʔłtmíxʷ. Tǝtéʔ k e stéʔs, tém ekʷu téʔ k e stéʔs e séytknmx. Tǝtéʔ k syix̣mstés k stéʔ. Tǝtéʔe k syix̣mstés k stéʔ téʔe tǝk c̓íy us xʷuy̓ scutǝ́ns. ƛ̓uʔ ʔe suʔéxs ƛ̓iʔsqáyxʷ ƛ̓uʔ ʔe scutés ł sc̓ǝqʔéwłc e sxʷuy̓s nes u ł e máʕxetn. Wʔéx ekʷu ƛ̓iʔsqáyxʷ ƛ̓uʔ ʔe sxʷáwkʷs k sx̣ǝkpstés tǝk c̓iy us xéʔe u cíʔe k scutǝ́ns. ʔE xéʔe ƛ̓uʔ ʔe scúts “Xʷuy̓ xéʔe x̣ǝkpsténe he c̓kén̓m us u cíʔe he scutǝ́ns, u cíʔe tǝk tmíxʷ k séytknmx.”

ʔE suʔéxs ƛ̓uʔ ʔe scutés k̓íʔk̓eʔt n ł Kénfǝrd, he cutés us tǝk kíyeʔ, Q̓ʷisqné. ƛ̓uʔ ʔe snéʔes e cutés us ƛ̓uʔ ʔe sƛ̓ǝq̓ʷmíntm. ƛ̓uʔ ʔe sʕʷyǝ́ps łúʔe ƛ̓uʔ kʔéw. ƛ̓uʔ ʔe stém e stéʔ k scutés ƛ̓uʔ xʷúy̓ceʔ nxʷúy̓t.

ʔIł cutés us xʷúy̓ceʔ n ł Nq̓áwmn, ƛ̓uʔ ʔe snéʔes e cutés us xʷúy̓ceʔ n ł nq̓áwmn ł xʷuy̓ xʷesítstm us u ł xéʔłtmíxʷ ł xʷuy̓ nxʷesíttns u ł xéʔłtmíxʷ. ƛ̓uʔ ʔe suʔéxs ƛ̓iʔsqáyxʷ ƛ̓uʔ ʔe scutés. Péyeʔ tǝk síƛ̓q̓t e scutés ł xʷuy̓ xʷesítstm us. Péyeʔ tǝk síƛ̓q̓t e scutés ł xʷuy̓ xʷesítstm us u ł xeʔłtmíxʷ. Tʕʷíyxsc néʔe ʔił nłém̓ix us ƛ̓uʔ ʔe snxʔéʔs ƛ̓uʔ kícx u ł e máʕxetn. 

"The Man who Went to the Moon" (intro. Bouchard Orthography)
W7áx akwu ná7 tl’i7sḵáyxw, tl’u7 7a sxwúy̓s xwesxwasít u lh xá7lhtmíxw. Tetá7 k a stá7s, tám akwu tá7 k a stá7s a sáytknmx. Tetá7 k syix̱mstás k stá7. Tetá7a k syix̱mstás k stá7 tá7a tek ts’íy us xwuy̓ stsuténs. Tl’u7 7a su7áxs tl’i7sḵáyxw tl’u7 7a stsutás lh sts’eḵ7áwlhts a sxwuy̓s nas u lh a mág̱xatn. W7áx akwu tl’i7sḵáyxw tl’u7 7a sxwáwkws k sx̱ekpstás tek ts’iy us xá7a u tsí7a k stsuténs. 7a xá7a tl’u7 7a stsúts “Xwuy̓ xá7a x̱ekpstána ha ts’kán̓m us u tsí7a ha stsuténs, u tsí7a tek tmíxw k sáytknmx.”

7a su7áxs tl’u7 7a stsutás k’í7k’a7t n lh Kánferd, ha tsutás us tek kíya7, Ḵ’wisḵná. Tl’u7 7a sná7as a tsutás us tl’u7 7a stl’uḵ’wmíntm. Tl’u7 7a sʕwyéps lhú7a tl’u7 k7áw. Tl’u7 7a stám a stá7 k stsutás tl’u7 xwúy̓tsa7 nxwúy̓t.

7ilh tsutás us xwúy̓tsa7 n lh Nḵ’áwmn, tl’u7 7a sná7as a tsutás us xwúy̓tsa7 n lh nḵ’áwmn lh xwuy̓ xwasítstm us u lh xá7lhtmíxw lh xwuy̓ nxwasíttns u lh xá7lhtmíxw. Tl’u7 7a su7áxs tl’i7sḵáyxw tl’u7 7a stsutás. Páya7 tek sítl’ḵ’t a stsutás lh xwuy̓ xwasítstm us. Páya7 tek sítl’ḵ’t a stsutás lh xwuy̓ xwasítstm us u lh xa7lhtmíxw. Tg̱wíyxsts ná7a 7ilh nlhám̓ix us tl’u7 7a snx7á7s tl’u7 kítsx u lh a mág̱xatn.


Coeur d’Alene

Man Caught in a Fire Corral
khwe 'ets'ku̲stm 'iits'i̲ts'tsmsh khwe tech hnch'mi̲p ku'm 'e'yni̲ł khwe gwe̲lntm 'uya̲r. ku'm khwi'ł ni'ne̲ptes 'ekhu̲sntm khwe tt'mi̲khw khwe che st'a̲pntm. hoy ku'm 'ushił 'epł t'a̲pm ku'm lut'u'l khwe sni'wt ku'm khwi'ye sgwelp t'aqht gwe̲lp. ku'm khukhwi'ye tsi' t'a̲pm ku'm tsi' sa̲q'unts. ku'm khwe̲t'p.
hoy ku'm khwi' khwe tchne̲k'we' gwi̲chtm 'iit'a̲pmsh. ku'm du̲'lmntsut. tsi'ł ku'm 'uł 'en'eni̲s. hoy ku'm łe ne' 'uł pne' tse̲tkhw hił qwa̲'qwe'l khwe schint hił miipnu̲ntm 'epł ch'u. hoy ku'm 'ekwn 'ume̲y chetgwelpi̲ne'. hoy te'ekhu̲sntm. ch'u. ł hnkwi̲'ts ku'm 'ekwn 'ume̲y chetgwe'lpi̲ne'. ku'm 'ekwn he smi̲'yem hoy 'uł che̲shntsel che stuusla̲q'met. hoy ku'm ne' t'u' 'a(w nee'm'nu̲s tk'winsh khukhwi'ya sqa̲'lqa'ltmkhw khukhwi'ye 'uł che̲shntm. khuł tsenchi̲ts. 'eku̲stm khwi' tsmi' me'l khwi'ł 'etsgwi̲chstm. hoy ku'm 'ekhu̲sntm la̲q'ntm khukhwi'ye 'e schint. tgwe'l da̲qhdeqht. 'ekwn khwi' t'i' ta̲qhoqhw. hoy ku'm t'i' 'uch'e̲'m. gwi̲chtm dsi̲iiigwt. hoy ya̲(a( khukhwi'ye schint. ts'u̲ts'u'm. ku'm khwi'ye smi̲'yem ła tach q'o̲mqis 'e̲mish ku'm tsenshlchełni̲'w pi̲łłlsh. ku'm tsi'ł ne'ku̲ hoy hi smu̲sm khwi'ł yo lut schint. ku'm 'uł mu̲snts khwe tech khwi' lut schint 'epł t'i̲nt'ine'. 'ekwn khwi'ye smi̲'yem he lut schint 'et'i̲khwlm khwi' schsłu̲smis. ku'm 'a 'aya̲( khwi'ł mu̲sntm. ku'n ła̲mqe'. hoy ku'm 'epł mekhwt. hoy ku'm 'uł t'e̲plish. 'uł 'ekhu̲sntm khwi'ya 'iits(u̲sm ha sqi̲'ltumkhw. ku'm 'ekhu̲sntm gwi̲chtm 'et'k'wi̲iii 'et'k'wi̲iii k'we'y 'etskhwe̲lkhwlt. 'itsgwe̲lp ku'n khwi' khwe ne' 'iit'a̲ps khwi' a hnła̲mqe'. ku'm tsi'ł 'uł khu̲ystm khwe tech tse̲tkhws khwi'ya sqi̲'ltumkhw. tsi' khwe hnkhwa̲tpalqs.

Man Caught in a Fire Corral (phonetic)
xʷe ʔecʔəkʷústm ʔiicʔícʔəcmš xʷe teč hnč̕əmíp kʷum̕ ʔey̕níɬ xʷe gʷélntm ʔuuyár. kʷum̕ xʷiʔɬ niʔnéptes ʔexʷúsntm xʷe ttm̕íxʷ xʷe če st̕ápntm. hoy kʷum̕ ʔuušiɬ ʔepɬ t̕ápm kʷum̕ lut̕ul̕ xʷe sniw̕t kʷum̕ xʷiy̕e sgʷelp t̕ax̣t gʷélp. kʷum̕ xʷxʷiy̕e ciʔ t̕ápm kʷum̕ ciʔ sáq̕ʷənc. kʷum̕ xʷét̕p. hoy kʷum̕ xʷiʔ xʷe tčnék̕ʷeʔ gʷíčtm ʔiit̕ápmš. kʷum̕ dúl̕məncut. ciʔɬ kʷum̕ ʔuɬ ʔenʔenís. hoy kʷum̕ ɬe neʔ ʔuɬ pəneʔ cétxʷ hiɬ qʷáʔqʷeʔl xʷe sčint hiɬ miipnúntm ʔepɬ č̕uu. hoy kʷum̕ ʔekʷn ʔuuméy četgʷelpíneʔ. hoy teʔexʷúsntm. č̕uu. ɬ hnkʷíʔc kʷum̕ ʔekʷn ʔuuméy četgʷel̕píneʔ. kʷum̕ ʔekʷn he smíy̕em hoy ʔuɬ čéšncel če stuusláq̕met. hoy kʷum̕ neʔ t̕uʔ ʔaʕʷ neem̕n̕ús tk̕ʷinš xʷxʷiy̕a sqál̕qal̕tmxʷ xʷxʷiy̕e ʔuɬ čéšntm. xʷuɬ cenčíc. ʔekʷústm xʷiʔ cmiʔ mel̕ xʷiʔɬ ʔecgʷíčstm. hoy kʷum̕ ʔexʷúsntm láq̕ntm xʷxʷiy̕e ʔe sčint. tgʷel̕ dáx̣dex̣t. ʔekʷn xʷiʔ t̕iʔ táx̣ʷəx̣ʷ. hoy kʷum̕ t̕iʔ ʔuuč̕ém̕. gʷíčtm dəsíˑˑˑgʷt. hoy yáʕaʕ xʷxʷiy̕e sčint. c̕úc̕uʔm. kʷum̕ xʷiy̕e smíy̕em ɬa tač q̕ʷómqis ʔémiš kʷum̕ cenšəlčeɬníw̕ píɬəɬəlš. kʷum̕ ciʔɬ neʔkʷú hoy hi smúsm xʷiʔɬ yo lut sčint. kʷum̕ ʔuɬ músnc xʷe teč xʷiʔ lut sčint ʔepɬ t̕ínt̕ineʔ. ʔekʷn xʷiy̕e smíy̕em he lut sčint ʔet̕íxʷlm xʷiʔ sčsɬúsmis. kʷum̕ ʔa ʔayáʕ xʷiʔɬ músntm. kʷun̕ ɬámqeʔ. hoy kʷum̕ ʔepɬ mexʷt. hoy kʷum̕ ʔuɬ t̕épəliš. ʔuɬ ʔexʷúsntm xʷiy̕a ʔiicʕʷúsm ha sqíl̕tumxʷ. kʷum̕ ʔexʷúsntm gʷíčtm ʔet̕ək̕ʷíˑˑˑ ʔet̕ək̕ʷíˑˑˑ k̕ʷey̕ ʔecxʷélxʷəlt. ʔicgʷélp kʷun̕ xʷiʔ xʷe neʔ ʔiit̕áps xʷiʔ a hnɬámqeʔ. kʷum̕ ciʔɬ ʔuɬ xʷúystm xʷe teč cétxʷs xʷiy̕a sqíl̕tumxʷ. ciʔ xʷe hnxʷátpalqs.


Columbia-Moses


Colville-Okanagan (Syilx)

Chipmunk and Owl Woman
q̓sapiʔ, ilíʔ kłxixəw̓təm̓ iʔ‿skʷists q̓ʷəq̓ʷc̓wíyaʔ l̓‿stəmtímaʔs ki mut laʔ cc̓əlc̓ál. q̓ʷəq̓ʷc̓wíyaʔ x̌minks iʔ‿sq̓ʷəlíw̓əm tə‿sp̓iʔqáłq uł cnutstís l̓ yamx̓ʷaʔs. ilíʔ nəqsíłməl̓x iʔ‿siyaʔ aʔ‿cpqʷilxsts yaʕt sx̌əlx̌ʕált. cut, axáʔ incá łaʔ kłsiʔíłməl̓x. iʔ‿xixəw̓təm̓ ctk̓íwlxəmsts uł ʔiłs put məq̓ínk łə‿cʔiłsts uł c̓əkntís, knaqsú••s p̓iʔáq, tkaslú••s p̓iʔáq, tkaʔłú••s p̓iʔáq. naqs sx̌əlx̌ʕált ilíʔ cc̓kam cʔiłsts iʔ‿siyaʔ q̓ʷəq̓ʷc̓wíyaʔ k̓łníxl̓əms cqal̓wítəm ilíʔ k̓ł̓aksəwxíp spapʕáłaʔ. silxʷaʔ yamx̌ʷaʔ aʔ‿cq̓ʷíłtəmsts nq̓ʷic̓t iʔ‿scəcm̓álaʔ. spapʕáłaʔ cxʷilwísmsts yaʕt iʔ‿ncəwcəwíxtən cnaq̓ʷəmsts iʔ‿scəcmíl̓t pən̓kín̓ ʔilxʷt uł itlíʔ ʔiłən tə‿naqs kəm̓ ʔasíl lut snx̌íłs q̓wəq̓ʷc̓wíyaʔ cmistís lut kskʷn̓úntəm tə‿spapʕáłaʔ tl̓‿siʔíłməlx uł‿nixʷ cmistís spapʕáłaʔ. n̓áx̌mł cmalx̌aʔ spapʕała?, nx̌əscnscút, cut , q̓ʷəq̓ʷc̓wíyaʔ anmístəm̓ kʷ‿x̌minks. q̓ʷəq̓ʷc̓wíyaʔ cut, lut kən‿t̓aʔ místəm, q̓sapiʔ ki ƛ̓lal. spapʕáłaʔ k̓łpaʔx̌ntís, uł cut , q̓ʷəq̓ʷc̓wíyaʔ anmístəm̓ kʷ‿x̌minks. q̓ʷəq̓ʷc̓wíyaʔ cut, lut kən‿t̓aʔ místəm, q̓sapiʔ ki ƛ̓lal. asw̓áw̓asaʔ x̌minks kʷ‿łxʷuyaʔx. cut spapʕáłaʔ lut kən‿t̓aʔ kłsw̓aw̓ásaʔ. ʕay̓ncút q̓ʷəq̓ʷc̓wíyaʔ. cut spapʕáłaʔ, kʷaʔ, ank̓ík̓waʔ‿kʷ‿x̌minks səxkinx, ink̓ik̓waʔ iʔ‿lutíʔ isk̓ʷul̓l̓ uł way̓ ƛ̓lal. sic cut spapʕáłaʔ. astəmtímaʔ ʕapnáʔ kʷ‿x̌minks akłəłxʷuy. nunxʷínaʔəms ixíʔ. k̓awcən̓ l̓ sʔay̓xaxáʔ uł cut. lut ikscsáx̓ʷt put kʷ‿ntəptəpúsəm. uł spapʕałaʔ malx̌aʔs ntəptəpúsəm tə‿c̓lx̓ʷíkstəms. way̓ wíkłtmn ckłəpłəpsám askłp̓əsƛ̓ʔús tl̓ ascaʕʷaʕʷíkst caʕcaʕáypəm q̓ʷəq̓ʷc̓wíyaʔ. lut ikscsáx̓ʷt put uníxʷ wəkʷwíkʷntntxʷ. spapʕa̓łaʔ malx̌aʔs wəkʷwíkʷs iʔ‿snk̓ʷəƛ̓k̓ʷəƛ̓ústns n̓áx̌əmł putiʔ łiq̓ʷt tl̓ scaʕʷaʕʷíksts cx̌əqxʷáq itlíʔ łiq̓ʷt. q̓ʷəq̓ʷc̓wíyaʔ nstils uníxʷ cntəptəpús, n̓áx̌əmł lut ksk̓ʷińiʔs cəm̓ məc̓ntím. uł lut scsax̓ʷts k̓l ʔayxʷút. cłət̓pmncút tl̓ nk̓amqns iʔ‿aʔ‿cłaq. kłt̓pmínaʔs spapʕáłaʔ iʔ‿c̓asyaqns łə‿kłət̓pmínaʔs spapʕáłaʔ ctxʷárkstəm kskʷən̓untəm. nʕaxʷkiʔntəm tə‿spapʕáłaʔ ct̓il̓t iʔ‿spumts tl̓ snk̓míkəns, n̓áx̌əmł łx̌ʷap. itlíʔ uł cnłp̓íkən q̓ʷəq̓ʷćwíyaʔ. q̓ʷəq̓ʷc̓wíyaʔ qícəlxuł qícəlx uł‿spapʕáłaʔ ƛ̓əx̌scút ʔaw̓típiʔs.


Montana Salish


Chinook Jargon


